# ComPlainDate

Date-time handling in JavaScript has always been hard. While we're all waiting
for Temporal to arrive, this is a collection of tools for **expressive and
timezone-safe manipulation of dates and times** on top of the JavaScript
features already available in today's browsers and runtime systems.

It may well be that ComPlainDate will stay useful even after Temporal is
available â€” only time can tell.

[API documentation](https://deno.land/x/complaindate/mod.ts).

## Why another JavaScript date-time library?

Most other date-time libraries either don't provide any clear strategy for
timezone handling, for example [date-fns](https://date-fns.org), or keep the
timezone information hidden inside date-time objects, like
[Luxon](https://moment.github.io/luxon/) does. ComPlainDate takes a lot of
inspiration from both of them (while staying clear of their pitfalls) and also
adds in some very useful ideas from the
[suggested Temporal API](https://tc39.es/proposal-temporal/docs/index.html). The
combination makes calendar operations in any timezone very easy to implement and
maintain, for frontend and backend alike.

The entire ComPlainDate API is explicitly designed to prevent developers from
making hard-to-spot mistakes and aims to remove the need for testing of any
timezone related edge cases. This is achieved with a few core principles:

- [Explicit named timezones](#explicit-named-timezones) must be given to any
  operation that actually require a timezone for results to be correct and
  predictable.
- [Separate plain-date and plain-time objects](#separate-plain-date-and-plain-time-objects)
  and provide independent operations that naturally apply to each type of
  object.

The dangers of accidentally working in an ambiguous or incorrect timezone is
meant to be completely eliminated by design. There just is no way to
accidentally add hours to a plain-date, subtract days from a plain-time or move
to the start-of-day for a global instant in time. Every function accepts just
the shape of objects that makes sense for its purpose and all returned objects
make their meaning clear.

## Guiding principles

### Explicit named timezones

These utilities are designed to always require a named timezone as the first
parameter for every operation that would be ambiguous without one.

This avoids confusion caused by working with JavaScript `Date` or other
_DateTime_-like objects where the timezone information is hidden away. Something
that becomes especially problematic when passing such objects over context
boundaries.

### Separate plain-date and plain-time objects

By keeping the calendar date and the time-of-day information in separate objects
we are free to do any operations on them both in an expressive way, with no need
to worry about such things as crossings into daylight savings time (DST) or what
start-of-hour means in a timezone with a 30-minute offset.

The only operations where we need an explicit timezone are when we split a
universal representation of an instant (e.g. `Date` object) into separate
plain-date and plain-time objects, and when we merge them back together.

### Instants are represented by `Date` objects

The native JavaScript `Date` object is actually good enough for keeping
universal representations of specific instants in time. `Date` doesn't have the
prettiest interface, but it makes little sense to replace it here. ComPlainDate
provides some useful utilities for those operations that are relevant to do
directly on instants, but honestly, they are quite few.

### Composable functions

Inspired by concepts from functional programming, all functions are pure and
composable and all operations requiring multiple arguments are implemented as
higher-order functions for currying.

Also, there are no classes here, only objects adhering to interfaces and the
factory functions to create them.

Please don't let this scare you, the ComPlainDate utilities are just as easy to
use in a non-functional paradigm too!

## Limitations

Current JavaScript `Date` objects support the Gregorian calendar only, and
therefore these tools have the same limitations.
